# Chapter 8: Advanced Features
> This chapter notebook provides examples for using the Advanced Features of Delta Lake

## Deletion Vectors Overview
Deletion vectors are a storage optimization feature that can be enabled on Delta Lake tables. By default, when a single row in a data file is deleted, the entire Parquet file containing the record must be rewritten. With deletion vectors enabled for the table, some Delta operations use deletion vectors to mark existing rows as removed without rewriting the Parquet file. Subsequent reads on the table resolve current table state by applying the deletions noted by deletion vectors to the most recent table version.

### The Main Idea
Sometimes we can look at a problem and think of different ways to solve it. One of the ways we've done this in Delta Lake is to enable the feature called [deletion vectors](https://docs.delta.io/latest/delta-deletion-vectors.html). One of the things you will should consider in data design thinking about how you want to optimize the performance of a table. In essence, you can optimize for either the table readers or the table writers. It's also important to note that the term deletion vector defines more of the form and function of what the process does rather than how it helps you as a feature. One of the key benefits is that it gives you the ability to do a *merge-on-read* operation. It drastically reduces the performance implications of doing simple, delete operations and instead postpones the performance impact of those delete operations until a more convenient time in the future (but in a rather efficient manner).

### Merge-on-Read Explained
What does merge-on-read mean? Merge-on-read means that instead of going through the operation of rewriting a file at the time of deleting a record or set of records from a particular file we instead make some kind of a note that those records are deleted, and postpone the performance impact of actually performing the delete operation until a time where we can run and optimize command or more complicated update statement. Of course, if someone were to read the table after a merge-on-read operation has been initiated then it will merge during that read operation and that's kind of the point because it allows us to minimize the performance impacts of performing a simple delete operation, or even multiple delete operations, and just perform it at a time later where you are already filtering on the same set of files while reading them and otherwise avoid it doing so in situation's where you don't need it to happen straight away.
Deletion vectors are a way to get this kind of merge-on-read behavior. Put simply, deletion vectors are just a file (or multiple files) adjacent to a data file that allows you to know which records are to be deleted out of the larger data file it sits beside and push that delete (rewrite) operation off to a later point in time that is more efficient and convenient). Alongside in this case is relative, it is part of the Delta Lake file but you will notice in partitioned tables that the deletion vector files sit at the top level rather than within the partition. You can observe this in the coming example.